Novel asexual lineages in a heteroecious Fungi Melampsora larici-populina: Insights from population genetics analysis
Abstract
The rust fungus, Melampsora larici-populina has traditionally been understood as a species with a complex heteroecious life cycle, characterized by extensive geographic distribution and high molecular diversity. However, recent observations in France have revealed the presence of persistent lineages over several years. This study aims to re-evaluate the nature of these lineages through comprehensive population genetics analysis, utilizing data from over 1700 isolates collected throughout France and incorporating information from 25 microsatellite markers.
Through the use of k-means clustering with K=2, PCA analysis, and population genetics analyses, interesting results have been revealed. One cluster displayed a negative FIS value (-0.361), indicating the presence of asexual reproductive mechanisms. Additionally, limited genetic recombination was observed among the molecular markers, supporting the notion of a clonal lifecycle. It is worth noting that these clusters are distributed in the southern of France, suggesting the possibility of environmental or ecological factors at implicate. Biological validation sheds light on the existence of asexual reproductive cycles within this species and offers new insights into its evolutionary dynamics across approximately seven different lineages. 
	Introduction
The polymorphism of the reproductive systems in the fungal kingdom characterizes it as one of the most complex life cycles among the other kingdoms. This is because almost all fungi exhibit an alternation of generations between gametothalli, a haploid spore in which sexual reproduction occurs through the fusion of two compatible nuclei, and sporothalli, a dikaryotic spore in which asexual reproduction takes place. The life cycle can occur as a mixed reproductive system or independently sexually or asexually. The strategy of the invasion process is based on the two types of reproduction. Sexual reproduction provides new allelic recombination, which ensures plasticity and adaptability. The population in the native environment that initiates the invasion is often a subset as a significant bottleneck within a small population with varying degrees of adaptation and resistance to the new environment or host and begins to secure a foothold and cause an epidemic by multiple cycles through asexual reproduction, which allows rapid reproduction and spread as a “Bridgehead effect”. This diversity of reproductive strategies was the main reason for their ecological success and evolutionary adaptation.












Sexual reproduction can be broadly defined as any natural process that involves the combination of genes from more than one source within a single cell (Xu, 2004), two distinct processes are commonly associated with sex - meiosis and syngamy; meiosis is a cell division process that produces gametes, which have half of the genetic material. In contrast, syngamy is the process of fertilization that entails the fusion of two gametes to form a zygote or organism with a complete set of genetic material (Bell, 1982; Orive & Krueger-Hadfield, 2021) which increases the genetic diversity. Conversely, asexual reproduction is defined by the generation of a cell/an organism that exhibits genetic identical to the parent, disregarding the somatic mutations (de Meeûs et al., 2007)Which avoids the cost of sexual production and finding a mate.
Some organisms, including those that have very different reproduction complexity, are capable of reproducing through both reproductive modes either through sexual reproduction or by undergoing asexual reproduction  (Xu, 2004; Orive & Krueger-Hadfield, 2021). This notable diversity enhances the adaptability and resilience in various environments, as they can employ alternative strategies to ensure the perpetuation of their species (Nöthiger & Steinmann-Zwicky, 1987). The trade-offs among different reproductive modes are influenced by the local ecological and demographic conditions, as they establish the framework for these decisions (Wilk et al., 2009).
The ability to reproduce through both sexual and asexual means is prominently observed in various organisms across different taxonomic groups. For instance, in the plant kingdom, certain wild strawberry Fields(Wilk et al., 2009), In the insect world, aphids have been studied extensively and shown to possess this reproductive flexibility (Ollivier et al., 2012), some Reptiles such as lizards (Case, 1990), Some crustaceans, such as certain species of freshwater crayfish (Scholtz et al., 2003). Moreover, most fungi demonstrate the ability to alternate both reproduction moods as well (Aanen & Hoekstra, 2007). These examples highlight the widespread occurrence of facultative reproduction across diverse organisms, underscoring its significance in contributing to their reproductive strategies and ecological success.
The emergence of invasive fungal species, responsible for crop diseases, encompasses multiple pandemics arising from asexual populations; asexuality is recognized as a significant factor in invasion success (Desprez-Loustau et al., 2007; Hayes & Barry, 2008). 
Significantly, asexual reproduction plays a major role in invasion or the emergence of pathogens. To give an example 
The little fire ant, Wasmannia auropunctata, is mainly found in tropical regions (Wetterer & Porter, 2003). Its reproductive strategy focuses on a predominantly asexual system, characterized by the female queens employing thelytokous parthenogenesis and the clonal system allows male reproduction. At the same time, the production of sterile workers relies on sexual reproduction, although further studies have revealed the presence of sexual lineages within the species(Fournier et al., 2005; Foucaud et al., 2006, 2007). This emphasis on asexual reproduction serves as the primary mode of invasiveness, which it considers as one of the worst invasive species worldwide (Simberloff & Rejmanek, 2019).
The rice blast disease, caused by the fungus Magnaporthe oryzae (Wilson & Talbot, 2009), exhibits the ability to implement dual reproduction moods. Nevertheless, the predominant mode of invasion in rice fields, leading to widespread infection, is through asexual reproduction. In this mode, the fungus reproduces rapidly and efficiently, allowing for rapid dissemination and colonization (Zeigler et al., 1997). Conversely, the sexual process of M. oryzae occurs in laboratory conditions and in limited areas in the field, where pairs of strains with opposite mating types are co-cultivated to induce sexual reproduction (Hayashi et al., 1997; Saleh et al., 2012).
Potato late blight, a pathogen caused by Phytophthora infestans, has demonstrated a versatile reproductive capacity that includes both sexual and asexual modes but relies predominantly on asexual reproduction for invasion and disease outbreak (Gavino et al., 2000; Fry, 2020). The ability of this pathogen to reproduce asexually led to a serious historical consequence — the Irish Potato Famine of 1840s — a catastrophic characterized by acute food shortages and widespread starvation (Ristaino, 2002).
As we have seen in the previous examples, in organisms that have the facultative ability to reproduce both sexually and asexually, asexuality becomes predominantly the primary mode of invasion. The phytopathogenic fungus Melampsora larici-populina, which causes poplar rust, belongs to the taxonomic order Pucciniales (previously known as Uredinales) (Steenackers et al., 1996), which is known as heteroecism, which refers to the fungus's need to infect two unrelated host plants to complete its sexual life cycle (Ørsted, 1863). A study conducted by (Xhaard et al., 2011) revealed the existence of a new lineage cluster that showed genetic signatures of a potentially asexual mode of reproduction, which had not been previously reported in this species. In our current study, we will address the impact of asexual interference on the evolution of pathogenicity and disease transmission.


 
II. Material and Methods
II.1 Samples and microsatellite markers 
Our database includes 1,745 isolates of Melampsora larici-populina collected across 61 departments in France. The dataset extends over multiple years, ranging from 1992 to 2020. We utilised a set of 25 microsatellite loci, encompassing 50 allelic markers selected based on a previous study (Xhaard et al., 2009) The raw data can be accessed through the following link (https://github.com/ammarabdalrahem/poplar_rust/blob/main/SexAsex4Ammar.xlsx ), Data processing and analysis were executed using R version 4.2.2 within the RStudio environment (version 2022.12.0+353).  The raw data is transformed into a ‘genind’ object format using the ‘poppr’ package (version 2.9.3). This format allows for the representation of individual genotypes and is well-suited for various types of population genetics analyses.
II.2 Define multilocus genotype and lineage
We defined multilocus genotype (MLG) per isolate, employing a zero threshold criterion, In this context if there is at least one difference on the scale of alleles between two individuals, they are defined as two distinct MLG. To classify isolates into different multi-locus lineage (MLL) we determined the cutoff point between MLLs using the filter_stats function form ‘poppr’. Three different clustering algorithms—Farthest Neighbor, Nearest Neighbor, and Average Neighbor (UPGMA)—were tested. The latter algorithm was chosen for its common usage in generating ultrametric trees based on genetic distance. It does so by creating representative samples for each cluster and joining clusters when these representatives are closer than a specified threshold (Kamvar et al., 2015). 
II.3 Identification of the isolates in clusters
In the scope of understanding the underlying structure of populations the workflow starts with identifying the genetic cluster depending on unsupervised analysis, such as K-means, We used the k-means method within find.clusters function form ‘adegenet’ (version 2.1.10), within supported biological indication according to a previous study (Xhaard et al., 2011). A value of 'k=2' was selected based on this prior knowledge. The find.clusters function initially employed Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to transform the data, which enabled the identification of genetic clusters. The results were stored in the variable 'grp'. Subsequently, the Discriminant Analysis of Principal Components (DAPC) is employed using dapc to identify distinctive genetic clusters through scatter plots and compositional plots, facilitating a comprehensive understanding of the genetic clusters. With the probability score for each individual assigned to each of these clusters, ensuring that only individuals with high-confidence cluster memberships are considered we add an additional layer of the individuals whose probabilities are greater than the cutoff of 0.8 remain and discard the ambiguous data isolates.  Consequently, individuals were classified into either cluster one or cluster two based on the probability of allelic frequency.
II.4 Profile identification and classification sex and asex
For each unique group in our investigation, we carried out a population genetics analysis using the ‘Poppr’ package, it computes essential genetic indices such as N (number of individuals per population), genotypic diversity (G/N), and multilocus linkage disequilibrium (rbarD). Followingly, the ‘Fstat’ package is used to compute additional indices, including observed heterozygosity (Ho), expected heterozygosity (He), and inbreeding coefficient (Fis). Allelic richness (Ar) is also calculated as a measure of genetic diversity. the results are organized into a table, where each row represents a population, and the calculated indices are stored as columns. afterward classifies populations into "Sex" or "Asex" categories based on specific criteria, including negative FIS values, particularly when they are significantly low from those of other populations, and high rbarD values. To precisely assess the presence of identical MLLs across various years with a minimum requirement of individual lasting at least two years as substantial evidence for the existence of a clonal reproductive system with this cluster one and it classifies it as “Asex”, otherwise, it labels it as “Sex”. This biological validation significantly enhances our understanding of the reproductive modes present within the studied population.  
II.5 Geographical visualization and phylogenetic analysis
Finally, we employed the map function from the 'maps' package (version 3.4.1) to create a geographical distribution map of individuals across France. The map includes pie charts to visually represent the proportion of sexual and asexual individuals within each geographical location. Additionally, we generated a phylogenetic tree based on SSR data to illustrate the clear categorization of individuals into sexual and asexual categories. These visualizations provide valuable insights into the spatial distribution and genetic relationships among individuals in our study population.
 
III. Result
III.1 Define MLG and MLL
In the context of this study, the concept of MLL was introduced to minimize potential genotyping errors, somatic mutations, and partial coloniality. To circumvent the arbitrary definition of a cutoff threshold based on allele differences to delineate MLLs, a genetic distance cutoff of 5.5, determined through the UPGMA algorithm (Figure 2) was employed. This approach resulted in the identification of 1,240 MLGs grouped into 1,141 MLLs.
Notably, the data exhibited a bimodal distribution, as illustrated in (Figure 2). This bimodality may be considered an indirect indication of the presence of two distinct categories, characterized by minor and major peaks.
 
Figure 2 Three algorithms for clustering to determine the MLL genetic distance cutoff

 
III.2 Distinguishing Between Two Distinct Clusters: Profiling as "Sex" or "Asex
To provide further clarity, The membership with K = 2 is a fixed value. The majority of individuals had a high proportion of members in one genetic group and few hybrids, and the scatterplot is the correlation between the probability for each individual within a cluster and the threshold probability required to be considered a member of that cluster, which is set at 0.8. At this stage, approximately 45 individuals (hybrids) were removed (Figure 2). Figure 3 : A: the compositional plot indicates the probability of membership for each individual in the two clusters, B: The scatterplot of the correlation between the probability assigned to each individual

 
III.3 Population Genetics Analysis and Insights
Thorough population genetic analyses for each cluster are presented in (Table 1), These findings provide profound insights into the genetic diversity of the two clusters. Particularly within Cluster 2, the presence of negative values of Fis provides strong evidence of clonality (Balloux, 2003)  It is essential to underline that this clonality is highlighted by the significantly lower Fis in Cluster 2 when compared to Cluster 1, thereby rendering it a compelling sign of pure clonal reproduction within Cluster 2, this outcome is validated by the higher value of linkage disequilibrium observed in Cluster 2 due to the absence of genetic recombination events in the clonal reproductive mode, additional confirmation of clonal reproduction within this cluster. Cluster profile was defined as 'Sex' and cluster 2 as 'Asex' based on population genetic analysis.
Table 1 List of clusters and their parameters of variability
	N	G/N	Ar	Ho	Hs	Fis	rbarD
Cluster 1	1307	0.878	2.917	0.482	0.532	0.093	0.018
Cluster 2	433	0.199	2.109	0.548	0.390	-0.405	0.352
 

To determine the genetic distance cut-off between different MLLs within each cluster, an additional investigation is displayed in the supplementary (Figure 4): the distinct genetic distance cutoffs employed to delineate Multilocus Lineages (MLLs) within each cluster, due to the abundance of similar MLLs in asexual clusters, the genetic distance cutoff is represented by a multinomial distribution, whereas in sexual clusters it is represented by a normal distribution. Figure 4 : The distinct genetic distance cutoffs employed to delineate Multilocus Lineages (MLLs) within each cluster
 
III.4 Biological validation
This table (Table 2) displays seven distinct MLLs, some of which have existed for around 30 years. This is supported by biological validation and population genetic analysis indicating their asexuality; all of them exist in an asexual cluster. However, there are some exceptions, such as 12 individuals who have been defined as sexual through population genetics analysis by exhibiting the allelic frequency of sexual lineages. Nonetheless, biological evidence confirms their clonality. On the other hand, around 17 individuals have been defined as asexual through population genetics analysis but lack biological records of the same MLL existing in at least two different years. This is because maybe the same MLL exists, but only in the same year of collection.
Table 2: Details of asexual lineages
MLL	Isolate No.	MLG No.	Year Range
1	255	41	1992:2020
2	23	8	1996:2020
3	43	5	1996:2011
4	38	14	1996:2020
5	13	5	1993:2014
6	49	4	2014:2020
7	14	3	2009:2011

Once we have conducted our biological analysis and obtained evidence of clonal production mood, we will proceed with a final population genetics analysis of two groups: the asexual and sexual groups. As you can see in (Table 3), the Fis value for the asexual group is negative (-0.361) and significantly lower than the sex group (0.092). Additionally, the standard deviation of Fis for the asexual group is higher (0.374) than that of the sexual group. 
 

Table 3: Population genetic characteristics
	N	G/N	Ar	Fis	(sd)	rbarD
Asex	438	0.185	4.390	-0.361	0.374	0.361
Sex	1307	0.886	8.771	0.092	0.111	0.018

 
III.4 Phylogenetic analysis and geographical distribution display distinct patterns
Using phylogenetic genetics analysis (Figure 5), we observe distinctions between the asexual and sexual groups of M. larici- populina. Within the asexual group, an obvious geographical pattern emerges. This is accompanied by the presence of a few distinct clades. Remarkably, when we look at the length of the column representing location indications alongside the year of sample collection, the varying heights of this column within the asexual group signify different years of collection within the same clade and geographical location.  In stark contrast, the sexual group reveals a lot of branches, reflecting a complex genetic landscape. This separation between the two groups shows the complicated relationship between reproductive modes and genetic diversity in M. larici- populina populations.


Figure 5:Neighbor joining tree (SSR) data
The data exploration reveals the distribution patterns of sexual and asexual lineages. In France, there is a significant proportion of the population with sexual reproduction, while the asexual lineages are more frequent in the south (Figure 5). This pattern may suggest potential environmental and/or ecological factors that favour the survival of asexual lineages in these regions. Particularly those found in southern regions may be influenced by various environmental factors, including winter temperature. 




Figure 6: Distribution of popular wrestling issues in France


 
Discussion
Genetic diversity of MLP individuals
We conducted a population genetics analysis of M. larici-populina and identified two clusters of individuals using 25 microsatellite markers. Our analysis included around 1141 MLL representing approximately 1700 isolates. One of the clusters had a lower Fis value compared to the other. This can be explained by clonal reproduction mood where majority (or all) individuals are heterozygous and this is not affected by mutations. When the value of Fis equals zero, it means that the coancestry of an individual is decreasing with mutations increasing with time. According to (Cockerham 1969,1973) Equation 1 of Fis, the value decreases as the clonal reproduction rates increase. his simulation shows that if there is any rate of sexual reproduction, the Fis value will be close to zero. However, in the case of pure clonal production, the Fis value will be much lower with a negative value (-0.361) and the other cluster (0.092)

F_is=(F-θ)/(1-θ)
Equation 1 F-statistics
Due to the lack of genetic recombination resulting from the absence of cell meiosis during sexual reproduction, the first cluster exhibits a high value of linkage disequilibrium (0.361) compared to the other cluster (0.018), as noted in Solenn's 2020 paper. This, along with the higher standard error of Fis (0.374) in the first cluster compared to the other (0.111), indicates significant variation in FIS values among different loci or populations and further supports the clonality of this cluster. These population genetic findings align with expected behaviours from simulations, providing strong genetic evidence of its pure clonal reproduction.

By adding another layer to search it, find the same MLL through different tiers another strong biological evidence about the clonal behavior of this individual in this cluster, 

we found only a few exceptions for 17 and 12 Zero defined as sexual as allelic frequency analysis, then existed more than one year their MLL so defined as clonal and the 17 defined as clonal, but their MLL  didn’t exist, through different who more investigation we found the or clonal mate of the same year that explain they behave as an allelic frequency as clonal but they are partial clonal which mean they collected in the same year in uredina as the clonal stage that is why they behave as same MLL in the clonal analysis but without biological evidence 

but the majority of individuals of cluster one exist through different years, and they are clonal
Consequent,ly we express one cluster appears to be a clonal reproduction system and the other a sexual reproduction system.
 The distribution of asexual individuals could be attributed to environmental factors or the distribution of host trees. Future analysis could be conducted by selecting all locations containing asexual samples and representing sexual samples from those locations, or by selecting all asexual samples and representing sexual samples.
The dendrogram circular tree suggests that asexual lineages have a longstanding genotype across different years and locations, which is the opposite of what is observed for sexual individuals. Additional sampling of sexual individuals from the same location could help to define the exchange/mutual investment of each lineage to the other.
Our study provides evidence of clonal reproduction in Melampsora larici-populina and highlights the importance of population genetics analysis in identifying different modes of reproduction. Clonal reproduction mode is a prevalent method of propagation observed in single-cell organisms, as well as multicellular eukaryotes such as fungi, plants, insects, fish, lizards, and nematodes. Sexual reproduction increases the efficacy of natural selection by generating genotypic diversity through the blending of allelic combinations and avoiding clonal interference, thereby breaking the linkage disequilibrium between beneficial and deleterious mutations. Striking a balance between these modes of reproduction can contribute to adaptive evolution by permitting the replication of advantageous allelic combinations.

